hazel gives her bats flight training
she does it here in a specially built
cage
it's a rare opportunity for us to bring
in specialist cameras
to observe backflight in detail
today hazel has two bats of different
species
with different flying techniques
first the aptly named brown longed bats
[Music]
it's short wide wings make flights slow
but maneuverable essential to navigate
through foliage
to snatch insects from leaves
[Music]
those ears are incredible and therefore
picking up tiny tiny insect sounds that
are around
the cluttered forest next apiptustrel
britain's commonest bat slimmer wings
give it a smoother faster flight
it can reach speeds of up to 30
kilometers an hour
ideal for capturing insects out in the
open
it's fascinating how the wing shape and
the speed of the back can tell you so
much about its biology and
what it's feeding on and where it's
foraging
[Music]
but the pipistrelle is a slow coach
compared to the fastest bat
in the world the brazilian freetail bat
has been clocked an astonishing 160
an hour speedier in level flight
than the fastest bird
what makes bats such accomplished flyers
is their extraordinary wings
this is x-ray footage of a bat in flight
filmed in a lab in the states
it reveals how their wings are based on
the same anatomy
as our hands but with massively
elongated fingers the four fingers make
up most of the wing
while the thumb has evolved into a claw
sticking out the front
before a bat can take off its wing
muscles need to be warmed up
to find out how ecologist dr liat wicks
uses a thermal camera to record the
temperature
this bat's been inactive for a while so
it's appearing cooler against the hand
to be able to fly and sort of kick start
their muscles they need to warm up quite
quickly
so what they have is something called
brown fat
this brown fat is concentrated between
the shoulder blades and it can be burned
to produce
extra internal heat so it'll take some
some minutes and once it's warmed up to
its optimum flight temperature
it'll then become more active and
probably take off
once in the air bats have the opposite
problem
cooling down because they flap their
wings up to 12 times a second
their muscles produce so much heat it
puts the bat at risk of
overheating
the bat's body appears very very hot
sometimes hotter than human face
in the infrared whereas the wings are
relatively cool
so where are they losing energy from
that so how are they not exploding
the recent study showed that they lose
the majority of their heat
from their body but it's still how how
are they doing that right so we're
looking at how
maybe it's radiating through the fur
itself we're very early stages of
baseline data collection but we are
we're testing those theories
research like this is revealing the
intricate natural engineering
that makes bats such amazing flyers
you